Revise linear gradient definition to make p2 the 'normal' (#219)
googlefonts/colr-gradients-spec: OFF_AMD2_WD.md

A linear gradient provides gradation of colors along a straight line. The
gradient is defined by three points, p₀, p₁ and p₂, plus a color line. The color
line is positioned in the design grid with stop offset 0 aligned to p₀ and stop
offset 1.0 aligned to p₁. (The line passing through p₀ and p₁ will be referred
to as line p₀p₁.) Colors at each position on line p₀p₁ are interpolated using
the color line. For each position along line p₀p₁, the color at that position is
projected on other side of the line.

The additional point, p₂, is used to rotate the gradient orientation in the
space on either side of the line p₀p₁. The line passing through points p₀ and p₂
(line p₀p₂) determines the direction in which colors are projected on either
side of the color line. That is, for each position on line p₀p₁, the line that
passes through that position on line p₀p₁ and that is parallel to line p₀p₂ will
have the color for that position on line p₀p₁.

Points p₁ and p₂ shall not be the same as point p₀. 

If line p₀p₂ is parallel to line p₀p₁ (or the angle between them is near-zero
for an implementation-defined threshold), then the gradient is ill-formed and
shall not be rendered.

> NOTE: An implementation can derive a single vector, p₀p₃, by computing the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: An implementation can derive a single vector, p₃p₀, by computing the
```

when talking about "vectors", and you say p₀p₃, I think about the vector produced by subtracting the two points (P0 - P3), thus an arrow that starts at P3 and points in direction of P0.
I think you mean the opposite. A gradient vector starts at P0 and goes towards P1 (or the effective P3).

Author: Interesting that we have different intuitions: I think of "p0p3" as going from p0 to p3. Revising wording...

Reviewer: I'm not necessarily saying that mine is the correct one.. If we could put an arrow on top of the notation "p0p3" then it would be clearer.

Reviewer: the revised wordings look good to me, thanks

orthogonal projection of vector p₀p₁ onto a line perpendicular to line p₀p₂ to

> obtain point p₃. The linear gradient defined using p₀, p₁ and p₂ as described

Reviewer: > a line perpendicular to line p₀p₂

... and passing through p0

Author: fixed

**5.7.11.1.2.2 Linear gradients**

A linear gradient provides gradation of colors along a straight line. The
gradient is defined by three points, p₀, p₁ and p₂, plus a color line. The color
line is positioned in the design grid with stop offset 0 aligned to p₀ and stop
offset 1.0 aligned to p₁. (The line passing through p₀ and p₁ will be referred
to as line p₀p₁.) Colors at each position on line p₀p₁ are interpolated using
the color line. For each position along line p₀p₁, the color at that position is
projected on other side of the line.

The additional point, p₂, is used to rotate the gradient orientation in the
space on either side of the line p₀p₁. The line passing through points p₀ and p₂
(line p₀p₂) determines the direction in which colors are projected on either
side of the color line. That is, for each position on line p₀p₁, the line that
passes through that position on line p₀p₁ and that is parallel to line p₀p₂ will
have the color for that position on line p₀p₁.

> Points p₁ and p₂ shall not be the same as point p₀. 

Reviewer 2: Suggest instead defining what happens when this is true, such as gradient is degenerate and nothing should be rendered (as in p0p2 p0p1 parallel section)

If line p₀p₂ is parallel to line p₀p₁ (or the angle between them is near-zero
for an implementation-defined threshold), then the gradient is ill-formed and

> shall not be rendered.

Reviewer 2: To offer another option, we can just say near-parallel for an implementation defined definition of near

> shall not be rendered.

Author: Weill use near-parallel

NOTE: An implementation can derive a single vector, from p₀ to a point p₃, by
computing the orthogonal projection of the vector from p₀ to p₁ onto a line
perpendicular to line p₀p₂ and passing through p₀ to obtain point p₃. The linear
gradient defined using p₀, p₁ and p₂ as described above is functionally
equivalent to a linear gradient defined by aligning stop offset 0 to p₀ and
aligning stop offset 1.0 to p₃, with each color projecting on either side of
that line in a perpendicular direction. This specification uses three points,
p₀, p₁ and p₂, as that provides greater flexibility in controlling the placement
and orientation of the gradient, as well as variations thereof.

Figures 5.12 – 5.14 illustrate linear gradients using the three different color
line extend modes. Each figure illustrates linear gradients with two different
rotation vectors. In each case, three color stops are specified: red at 0.0,
yellow at 0.5, and red at 1.0.

![Linear gradients with different color-projection orientations using the pad extend mode.](images/colr_linear_gradients_pad.png)

> **Figure 5.12 Linear gradients with different color-projection orientations using the pad extend mode.**

Reviewer 3: On this one the 0 of P0 is occluded by the dotted line, could you move that out of the way?

![Linear gradients with different color-projection orientations vectors using the repeat extend mode.](images/colr_linear_gradients_repeat.png)

> **Figure 5.13 Linear gradients with different color-projection orientations vectors using the repeat extend mode.**

Reviewer 3: Ditto.

Author: Re-doing the linear gradient images, moving p0 on the left side and rasterizing in Chrome.

NOTE: An implementation can derive a single vector, from p₀ to a point p₃, by
computing the orthogonal projection of the vector from p₀ to p₁ onto a line
perpendicular to line p₀p₂ and passing through p₀ to obtain point p₃. The linear
gradient defined using p₀, p₁ and p₂ as described above is functionally
equivalent to a linear gradient defined by aligning stop offset 0 to p₀ and
aligning stop offset 1.0 to p₃, with each color projecting on either side of
that line in a perpendicular direction. This specification uses three points,
p₀, p₁ and p₂, as that provides greater flexibility in controlling the placement
and orientation of the gradient, as well as variations thereof.

Figures 5.12 – 5.14 illustrate linear gradients using the three different color
line extend modes. Each figure illustrates linear gradients with two different
rotation vectors. In each case, three color stops are specified: red at 0.0,
yellow at 0.5, and red at 1.0.

![Linear gradients with different color-projection orientations using the pad extend mode.](images/colr_linear_gradients_pad.png)

**Figure 5.12 Linear gradients with different color-projection orientations using the pad extend mode.**

> ![Linear gradients with different color-projection orientations vectors using the repeat extend mode.](images/colr_linear_gradients_repeat.png)

Reviewer 3: Since we're talking about a rotation point and rotation vector in line 307 and this was a rotation vector in the previous text - would it make sense to say rotation vector, or just rotation here?

```suggestion
![Linear gradients with different rotation vectors using the repeat extend mode.](images/colr_linear_gradients_repeat.png)
```

Author: I'll change to simply "rotations"

**Figure 5.13 Linear gradients with different color-projection orientations vectors using the repeat extend mode.**

![Linear gradients with different color-projection orientations vectors using the reflect extend mode.](images/colr_linear_gradients_reflect.png)

**Figure 5.14 Linear gradients with different color-projection orientations vectors using the reflect extend mode.**

When a linear gradient is combined with a transformation (see 5.7.11.1.5), the
appearance shall be the same as if the gradient were defined using the

> transformed positions of points p₀, p₁ and p₂.

Reviewer 3: 1) Minor: Did an earlier version of this have this "lemma" as a note? As mentioned, I prefer to phrase this as a note as it already follows from `PaintLinearGradient` and `PaintTransformed`.

2) I find it surprising that this is here after the images. I would find it more suitably placed in line ~328.

|-|-|-|
| uint8 | format | Set to 3. |
| Offset24 | colorLineOffset | Offset to ColorLine table. |
| VarFWord | x0 | Start point (p₀) x coordinate. |
| VarFWord | y0 | Start point (p₀) y coordinate. |
| VarFWord | x1 | End point (p₁) x coordinate. |
| VarFWord | y1 | End point (p₁) y coordinate. |
| VarFWord | x2 | Orientation end point (p₂) x coordinate. |

> | VarFWord | y2 | Orientation end point (p₂) y coordinate. |

Reviewer 3: IMO it's not really an end point - as nothing ends there. Perhaps "Rotation point P2 x/y coordinate"? Mildly prefer rotation, as orientation rings a little confusing to me: it sounds to me like it could mean swapping the color line.

Reviewer 2: Would it make sense to borrow the "normal" terminology of https://www.w3.org/TR/SVG2/pservers.html#Gradients? - we can then cite that if necessary.

Author: "Normal" in math mean 'orthogonal'. If we use "normal", then it would beg the question, "Orthogonal to what?" In SVG, they don't have any equivalent to P2, and the "normal" is always orthogonal to p0p1. In our case, depending on placement of P2, p0p2 could be orthogonal, but also could not be. So, when we've referred to it in our discussions as the "normal", that's convenient for our purposes but not really accurate. 

"Iso-color line" would be an accurate description, though that's a neologism I came up with that probably nobody has ever heard of, and only Greek geeks would understand.

Author: I've added a note in 5.7.11.1.2.2 introducing "rotation" wording, and updated the table in 5.7.11.2.5.4.
